about 60 to 80 percent of people mostly
aged 15 to 25
occasionally have goose bump inducing
deja vu moments
it's fleeting and unpredictable and
scientists are still not 100 percent
sure
why it happens and can't control it to
understand it better
they tried to create memories for
patients under hypnosis
then they asked them to forget or
remember the memory
and it made them experience deja vu
later
other scientists tried to recreate it in
virtual reality
with scenes and games that looked alike
the experiments made them believe deja
vu is your memory playing tricks on you
you get into a situation that's similar
to a real memory that you have
but you can't remember it completely
your brain notices the similarities
and leaves you with a strange feeling of
already seen
that's how deja vu translates from
french
another version is that it's a memory
glitch it's more likely to happen
when you're stressed when you're under
pressure or have a lot of information to
process at once
some of it can end up in long-term
memory instead of short-term memory
it could also be the result of a sudden
electrical discharge of neurons in the
brain
that creates false connections one guy
had the chronic version of deja vu
and felt stuck in a time loop for eight
years
even stopped watching tv listening to
the radio
and reading newspapers because he always
felt like he had seen it all before
each episode lasted for minutes and it
felt like living in a weird movie
his brain scans looked normal though so
it must have been a psychological issue
between 40 and 60 percent of people
experience
the opposite of deja vu it's the feeling
when you don't recognize a well-familiar
setting
like the house you grew up in or a
person
a word you've known your entire life can
also suddenly seem strange
and even your own face in the mirror
if your second cousin claims he's an
expert in geography
and then argues paris is the capital of
italy at a family party
he's probably driven by the
dunning-kruger effect
people who are incompetent in something
aren't able to assess their skill level
they refuse to recognize their own
mistakes and the expertise of other
people
it happens because you need the same
knowledge and skills to be good at
something
as to recognize you aren't good at it
even a tiny bit of knowledge can
sometimes make you believe
you're an expert at something the more
you study the subject
the more you realize there's still a lot
to learn
that's why people who know a lot about
something often underestimate their
skills
and doubt what they know so when in
doubt
ask other people you trust for feedback
horoscopes and personality test results
often feel as if they were written just
about you
because of the barnum effect your brain
fills in the gaps in vague and general
statements
that could be true for anyone to make
you link them with your life
it works especially well with positive
statements as your brain normally treats
negative ones more skeptically
entertainment websites and apps now use
this effect
to sell you so-called personalized
products
when you have a bad hair day or an oil
stain on your white shirt
you're sure everyone is staring at you
because of the spotlight effect
when you're focused on something your
brain makes you believe
everyone else is focused on that as well
you're naturally the center of your own
universe
and you see the world through your
experiences and perspective
others do the same so don't worry about
that stain
when you're eating out before an
important job interview
you may feel like everyone in the room
knows exactly how nervous you are at
that moment
this brain trick is called the illusion
of transparency
it's caused by the same reasons as the
spotlight effect
a good way to get over it is to remember
others don't have
full access to your thoughts and
feelings and they can't read your mind
the halo effect is the reason why you
judge someone's actions
based on how much you like them when you
find someone good looking
your brain often makes a conclusion that
they're also
smart and nice when a person is positive
and enthusiastic at work
it can often overshadow their lack of
skills and make others see them
as better professionals than they really
are
when you dislike someone everything
about them like the way they speak or
chew
drives you nuts as negative episodes
connected with that person
pile up the related neural connections
in your brain
become stronger and make you only focus
on all the bad that they do
the brain even distorts facts about them
to fit your view
and blinds you from noticing the good
things that they do
confirmation bias makes you look for
confirmation of what you believe
in everything you gather information
selectively ignoring even the obvious
facts that oppose your existing ideas
that's why when you're browsing the
internet you're more likely to notice
materials that support your opinion on
the matter
it's a way for your brain to somehow
sort and process
limitless amounts of information
surrounding you plus
knowing that your point of view is
accurate helps your self-esteem
anchoring is a mind trick that makes you
stick to the first impression of someone
or something
and affects your decisions when you see
a ten dollar frappuccino on top of the
menu at a coffee shop
a five dollar americano seems like a
bargain
you get it without thinking it's still
too much because the first price you saw
was way higher
to stop anchoring from forcing you into
bad decisions
you gotta find more info and weigh all
the options
when an emergency happens and you expect
someone else to step in and help
that's the bystander effect in action
the more bystanders are around
the less chance there is any of them
will do something
it makes you feel less personal
responsibility
because of social influence you look at
others and copy their behavior
of doing nothing if you say oh
i'm mad you're here instead of oh i'm
glad you're here
that's a classic freudian slip they're
real windows into your unconscious mind
they happen mostly when you're tired or
emotionally overwhelmed
your brain takes advantage of it and
tricks you into saying
what you're most scared to say your
brain will always convince you
you fail because of reasons outside your
control
you got bad test results because your
dog never stopped barking
didn't let you study you broke that vase
because your phone rang and
scared you all these made up excuses are
your brain's attempt to protect your
self-esteem
and stop your fear of failure when you
succeed at something
you always believe it's the result of
your skills and efforts
even if it was by accident your brain
will convince you
you completely deserve it declinism
is the official term for remembering the
past better than it was
and seeing the present and the future in
overly
negative light it makes you believe
things are worse now than they once used
to be
tv and media are partially to blame for
this
you get to see tons of negative and
shocking news
which confirms your beliefs the present
is scary
and the future uncertain it also happens
because of the old survival instinct
to pass on genes people constantly had
to watch out for threats and dangers
when your new colleague leaves the flash
drive with a group project at home
you conclude she's a bad and
irresponsible person
when you do the same it's because of
some unfortunate circumstances
that's fundamental attribution error
you explain mistakes of others with
their bad personality
and your own with some external factors
your memory doesn't work like a video
camera that records
every moment exactly like it happened
it's way more fragile
and inaccurate it's rather easy to
distort someone's memories
or even create false ones it can be as
easy as showing someone a video
they didn't take part in to make them
believe they were there
you also forget a lot of information
from useless
everyday details to important stuff a
forgetful brain
works like a filter that sorts out
painful experiences from the past
and makes room for new memories